Breast cancer is a serious life-threatening condition but its victims can have a better quality of life with early diagnosis and intervention. However, many biomedical approaches can be quite costly and it is important for research developments to impact more people. Machine learning (ML) and Artificial intelligence (AI) has been shown to be a very useful and cost-effective tool for various computational tasks such as finding outcome probabilities (odds) to make accurate classification predictions. For example, support vector machine (SVM) is a supervised machine learning model that analyzes data for classification tasks, and its goal is to map an input dataset into multidimensional feature space using nonlinear functions and maximizing the distance between margins in data points. In this project, SVM was used on a cancer dataset obtained from a machine learning repository to predict whether the patient’s tumor is malignant or benign (two classes) based on the patients clinical features. It was hypothesized that a machine learning model could be developed for accurate tumor classification predictions. The SVM model was split into training and testing data, fit using training data, and classification prediction was performed using a testing dataset. The accuracy was then evaluated with a confusion matrix, generating values for true/false negative and true/false positive predictions, along with the area under the receiver operating characteristic curve (AUROC) of 0.7712, an acceptable metric of diagnostic accuracy. The initial claim that the classification model would be very reliable was not completely supported, as its false positive and negative counts could result in misleading predictions. In conclusion, SVM is a decent machine learning model for breast cancer prediction.
